---
title: "Strait is the Gate: A Theological probe into the Human Heart"
date: 2026-03-07
excerpt: Book Review, Ep. 1
cover: https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/71GcbeNUfUL._UF1000,1000_QL80_.jpg
---
*La Porte Étroite* , one of AndréGide’s monumental early works, translates directly to English as “the Narrow Door”. Dorothy Bussy, the translator of the work and close friend of Gide, chose to interpret it as it appears in Luke 13:24 (GNV), *Strait is the Gate.* The title itself is an allusion to the bible and, as the work revolves around this religious tension, appropriately so.

André Paul Guillaume Gide was a prolific writer who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1947. He was known for his candid and, at times, controversial stance on spirituality, sexuality, self-identity, and politics. Raised in a puritan family, his thoughts reflect both inkmarks of his own experiences but also ideas that clash and push back against it.

Though often seen as a “100-page classic” on the TBRs of people who like to pretend that they like reading classics though really it’s just to make themselves feel better through literary elitism subconsciously (as in, me), the work has not received nearly as much attention as other contemporaries of his. Considered perhaps one of the dozen most influential writers in the 20th century, his work inspired the likes of Sartre and Camus along with playing a pivotal role in shaping the moral and philosophical atmosphere.

The book consists of retrospective prose dotted with scattered letters and diary entries, framed over a decade in its hundred-and-some pages. The narrative, set in France, follows Jerome, a teenager who discovers an intimate relationship with his older cousin Alissa. Though they share a deep, mutual affection, Jerome is hindered by Alissa’s insistence on religious purity.

The concept of the narrow door, as proposed by Jesus in the gospel of Luke, strove to drive away those who could not relinquish their pride and burdens at the entrance to the kingdom of God. In this text, it serves as both a gate to the supposed heavens but also the gate too narrow to permit the lovers through in tandem. 

The book tickles very specific spots for me, all at once. The philosophical depth and austere, intellectual life that Jerome pursues as the desire for Alissa burns at his side is something too often underanalyzed in the modern perspective of love. It’s both a distraction and a phenomenon that results from an introspective valuation that happens every time a person is put up to odds against another in love. The way that love rips and tears at one’s own identity, reshaping it to revolve it around their lover as if one was never meant to exist alone. The feeling when love isn’t reciprocated that one is never good enough, in all and every way, infatuation turning into a sort of twisted energy to improve. While it can bring about positive results, it also inevitably backfires by subtly fostering a sense that self-worth can be quantified and, hence, love can be bought and sold. 

The relegation of love to beneath every other perceivable good (success in school, piety to family,  opportunities in work) in East Asian cultures contributes to it being vastly more popular in China than most western countries in the modern day. Gide asks not “why must you love” but rather explores ‘Why she backs away from that love” The inherent twistedness of love under these pressures resonate in a different way, a flower of a different bloom. 

The book covers a surprising amount of timeless struggles in love in its short form. In her suite of pretexts to accepting Jerome’s love, Alissa recognizes that Jerome had been loving a past version, an ideal of her, when she has undeniably changed. She believes that this change is degrading for her worthiness of being loved by Jeroms, and she also degrades herself directly, claiming to be steps below Jerome in her intellectual taste and “too old” for him. Although the authenticity of these claims are up for interpretation, it ties in to Alissa’s characterization closely.

Embracing an unnecessary level of self-sacrifice, Alissa embodies an almost Jesus-like figure in the narrative. She is the ultimate salvation to Jerome, but she turns away from their mutual love in pursuit to sacrifice her personal wants in exchange for the hope that Jerome would find someone better than herself and that they would be absolved from divine punishment. Her resolve in the latter is so definitive that she turns away and detaches when Jerome pushes for promises and commitment even though she could hardly contain her own desire for him. This begs the question “Why was she tormenting herself” if she could’ve accepted something that both she and Jerome would’ve wanted.

The main reason for her actions, in my opinion, is Alissa’s excessive selflessness and misinterpretation of others around her. God never claims “You may not love him” but she herself claims that “I must not love him to serve God better, and so he can find someone better.” Never does she contemplate the value of her own emotions. This constraint, poignant between the words of intimacy, charges the plot with weight.

The main conflict being highly spiritual, along with the way it is presented and stylized, makes the work in its entirety come off to me as somewhat hollow. Up until Alissa’s death, there was virtually no other conflict over the magnitude of “This Aunt spoke too loud while we were trying to have a moment” outside their philosophical struggles with love and God. Though it spans over a decade, we are given almost no backstory and minimal details on Jerome’s life and relationships outside of Alissa. For a book which has a plot so fixed on the deep, philosophical romance, the ambivalent descriptions and unsatisfying end of the “meat” of the narrative hardly fill the weight in the emotions bucket as much as the floaty, imaginative romances of the 21st century. 

Still, the unique place this work holds in classical literature is firm and the story it tells is touching all the more.
