---
title: Asphalt 8 And the End of my Childhood
date: 2026-03-12
excerpt: "And I never stopped playing games, no. "
cover: https://cdn.gsmarena.com/pics/13/08/airborne-review/gsmarena_001.jpg
---
I went back to play Asphalt 8 today. Not much, and not for good, but just to relive a vestige and small part of who I used to be. I had forgotten about it for years. And I would've continued keeping it forgotten, I’m sure, if a classmate of mine had not been playing an emulated version of it on the computer during history class. 

Apparently, the game has been around since 2013, and is supported on macOS, windows, Android, iOS, and others. It has a 91/100 rating across 18 platforms. Young me had been oblivious to this, of course. It took a little getting used to for me to dominate again using the “tap to steer” function that I thought was so much more innovative–and elegant–than what other mobile racing games had. 

I had never played its predecessor, but I did spend a couple hours on the sequel "Asphalt 9: Legends". It did not live up to this classic. The reason I even knew the game was because at that point, I had gained access to a family iPad for an hour every day. In a sense, I was an iPad kid too in those years, except strictly controlled by micromanaging parents. It really is a good idea in retrospect. Nonetheless, I had lost the privilege of playing games on my dad’s phone because the deregulated Android app store ended up allowing 8-year-old me to get a taste of suggestive content and political innuendo, along with gore. This is not to say that I did not eventually play much more violent, graphic, and sexually explicit games, but that’s a topic for another day. 

At that very point in time, all was fine and dandy with me sticking to whatever was topping the charts. The memories of those days where I played for hours on end, with nothing better to do in the never-ending summer days come bittersweet to me, entwined with the trauma of getting beat and punished–most often with getting the iPad taken away–for not studying, or whatever I did not meet up to. But I turned out alright. 

The thing about this game that is so captivating is its gameplay mechanics. While ridden with revulsing microtransactions and paywalls even when I played, the game itself was so well designed that I had much fun playing with the few free cars that were available to me without feeling at all limited. The beautiful portrayal of N2O nitrous boosting speed, as literal chains of fire propulsing you forward still drives me insane and I was forever disappointed when I found out that real cars did not do this. Further, you could ram into other cars and literally pulverize them. That was sick to me then, and still is now. The game modes, such as Elimination and Infection (where you rammed into other cars in some mechanical-plague situation) made things interesting, and progression was (somewhat) reasonable.

And, because of desktop racing games trending towards realistic races instead of the arcade gameplay, I never found the feeling I felt in my mania of Asphalt when I played Forza Motorsport, Assetto Corsa, or Forza Horizon. In middle school, I would turn on realistic damages on Motorsport 7 and ram into my dad repeatedly, sometimes even head on, to simulate that thrill that I got from Asphalt. Really. 

The updates were bad. The motorcycle getting introduced was fine, but it all went down from there. Their “mascot”, a poor imitation of what would be a race show model, looks like it had been designed to steer away players. The upgrades are acquired by literally watching ads for free-to-play users, and the opening animations are a next level of cheapness and a (clearly unsuccessful) trap at getting players to spend money on cosmetics. Still, the graphics and base game remain mostly unchanged. That one singular core merits me sitting through the other BS. It’s really that good. At least, in hindsight. The simulated HDR effects and rendering engines are solid now, but they were nothing short of a miracle in the mid-2010s. 

But the maps. They were beautiful. Sector 8 with the Loop-de-Loop, Nevada, Iceland. To just go down them one more time, and remember suddenly the nooks and corners where you obliterated your opponents or crashed repeatedly brought tears to my cheeks quicker than any sentimental soap opera. It has to do with me not remembering much anymore. Somehow bringing that piece that surely was impossible back was exactly like how it was depicted in *Inside Out, with* Joy and Bing Bong. 

And that’s the poignant part, that I don’t want to confront as there is no way out. I don’t remember not because it’s not worth remembering, but because it gives no value for my studies. I traded all the memories with childhood friends, with my grandparents, and all those days when days actually felt like days and not some poorly edited time lapse for a few more polyatomic ions, a few more equations for derivatives, and a few more bible verses for English. 

I guess the ironic part was that I came across this game because I had guilt-tripped myself into reading some “classics” on my iPad rather than playing games on my computer. It’s not even guilt tripping. Nobody’s making me. And classics are alright. But I never gave a fuck when I was still out there, playing an hour of Asphalt 8 a day, when I did not have to feel bad about what I spent my time on. Before everything started feeling like it “fell off”, even the game. When you have to judge yourself for spending time doing something you enjoy, I guess that's when your childhood is over. 

And, of course, I had to put on “Bleach” by Krub Wenkroist. Just the final piece down memory lane.
