---
title: Entropy, Determinism, and One Hundred Years of Solitude
date: 2026-02-22
excerpt: "Spoiler Alert. "
category: Book Review
cover: https://dnm.nflximg.net/api/v6/BvVbc2Wxr2w6QuoANoSpJKEIWjQ/AAAAQfBwTxJRpG5_aOTaWRaYa21rCJKv-DOwx7hM5WsFT-PrOy4_Gs8_DAbcy4qRWukufI-v6c20DzQPmvDW79ucfbXIIUxbisH-ROfZWBNOF4DvVVF9OnKVNwZz_PGCRCnctCmyTI3rbbLKtEJ71wzlgOYK6Ew.jpg?r=cc7
---
From a contemporary reader’s perspective, Gabriel Garcia Marquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude is hardly a page-turner. Its narrative, warped and nonlinear in structure, ebbs and flows through flashbacks, foreboding portents, and sudden shifts in perspective. Marquez’s prose is hardly bland, but rather so superfluous with minute details and appositives that illustrate the village of Macondo down to the silverwares’ country of origin that the reader can often be so zoomed in as to lose the trail of characters and plot progression, physically and mentally. It is no help, moreover, that he doesn’t hesitate to utilize literary and somewhat-antiquated (to no fault of his own, as he had penned the masterpiece over half a century ago) diction in the form of never-ending adjectives, adverbs, and proper nouns which, to use his own words, eviscerate much of my own clairvoyance in trying to comprehend.

Even after conquering these hurdles, the Nobel laureate's work can seem like nothing more than an imaginative and slightly perplexing chronicle of a family’s series of inconsequential and unrelated events disguised as a novel at face value. To reap the rewards the reader has sowed by pulling together the wherewithal to somewhat keep track of all seven generations of the Buendia family, it is unavoidable to confront the fact that the narrative had never been meant to be about the individual characters or one single event. While we are predisposed to anticipate a resounding resolution or some sort of character growth-by-challenge at the end, none is given. Deaths happen mid-sentence with alarmingly little elaboration, and when characters change it is rarely for the better. 

While Marquez is a virtuoso in his subtleties, we do not learn of the “biblical sandstorm” that finally consumes the village until the very last page. Although one can argue that Aureliano (one of many)’s prophesying the end of his lineage as it happens at the end of the hundred years is the most awe-inspiring subtlety, snuck in since the very introduction of Melquiades in the first chapter, it is hard to grapple emotionally with the ungrounded events that veer the plot in unconventional and most definitely unexpected directions. The weight given to disproportionately minute happenings as canonical anchors to the plot mirrors the genre's general theme. Magical realism focuses on the absurd incorporation of fantasy into an otherwise realistic narrative, and only through seeing past the obvious impossibility and randomness can one gain a renewed sense of coherence. Colonel Buendia, the would-be protagonist, does not die in his thirty-two wars or by the innumerable assassination attempts, but rather is whimsically consumed by a horde of flying ants in his senile years, lured away from his repetitive activity of crafting and uncrafting his little fishes by a carnival. A carnival like the one we are introduced to in the very first sentence, where his father took him to see ice. Where we are first led to learn about this most epic story. Even there, the whimsical happenings intertwine and grow off of powerful subtleties and symbolism. 

 By the time a character is named Jose Arcadio or Aureliano the third or fourth time, the reader inherently understands, or at least begins to notice that the name carries meaning beyond tradition. This cyclical repetition forces characters into the mistakes and fatal woes of their predecessors, in one way or another. The forbidden love between family to combat the fatal solitude that time and again besets the Buendias is revealed in the portentous caution against the pig’s tail, and yet it does not fulfill until the end, studding the last of the Buendias.

This aspect of the narrative introduces a layer of historical weight to Marquez’s work. In his Nobel Prize Lecture (1982), he speaks extensively on the political turmoil that has plagued Latin America through unnecessary killings, autocracy, and the solidarity that reigns even in desolation. The entropy and disorder that his homeland faces was not unconquerable in the least. In fact, his pivot to improve the human condition by bringing peace to the region mirrors a call of prayer in the wilderness, to indifferent deities of the developed world. Macondo was wiped by a fictional windstorm, yes, but it had died a thousand times prior in the neglect to its own, collective identity that Jose Arcadio had brought on his expedition.

The text provides a surprising refutation to the first things that I thought of when trying to categorize the theme, those being entropy and naturalism. The second law of thermodynamics states that the total entropy (disorder) of an isolated system always increases over time or remains constant in ideal, reversible cases, but never decreases. I had thought Macondo thrived on its own for many years, bolstered by the then-hospitable and mystical Buendia family. This represents the constant level of stability that held together the village in the years “when nobody has died yet, so there was no need for a cemetery” However, the equilibrium is clearly broken by the civil wars and the arrival of the American banana company. While it seems to still have much life on the surface, the unsustainable growth and extraction of value foretells the age-old ending of Macondo’s abandonment. We are so far removed from the conflicts of the narrative that it feels like Macondo’s dying out is of its own doing. The massacre and perpetual rain, hence, were simply catalytic events that hid away the fact that. The inventions, glimpses of the larger, connected world, promise a future where seemingly anything is possible but always end in decay from a lack of interest and value in ever integrating Macondo. The fatalist themes don’t need to spell themselves out. The novel opens with “Many years later, facing the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendia would remember the distant afternoon…” the leap in time suggesting a causation, an inexorable tie weaving all these events into one coherent fate. Entropy relies on a closed system, and Macondo only offers the illusion of being secluded. The characters are pushed and steered, by one thing or another, into the fate prescribed to them. It is neither more or less chaotic than it needs to be for these events to happen and the prophecy to be fulfilled. 

Another thought that initially struck me as a theme was naturalism, but it is in fact the opposite. I felt that the events were just all part of a coincidence that reverted back to some arbitrary point, when in fact there was a causal determinism that coursed through every line and every event that happened. From the very beginning when the ancestors of Ursula and Buendia met, to the final birth of the child with the pig tail, every event carried a larger purpose, a foreboding note towards the baleful, abrupt end. The novel is unsatisfying and abrupt in this way it chooses to chain whole lives worthy of their separate books together, skipping and turning to wherever was most pertinent in the Buendia family, but it is also resounding and magnificently writ because of the sheer magnitude and resounding resolution in the very irresolution of Macondo’s end.

For me, it is painfully resonant because I could tell you everything about the future. I could tell you exactly how each of these days is going to go, from now to the summer. And with a little help, I could tell you the outline of the next two and a half years. I’m revisiting this age-old topic of determinism on the verge of the longest stretch of school–the most predictable one. I had done this all before, the only difference being we’re all older now. We had just lost a robotics regional championship, one that we had once dominated more than half a decade ago but now seemed unconquerable. The pain was that despite saying we’d change for good this year, we ran the same protocols, chanted the same slogans, and fought over the same meaningless things. It made me feel like maybe we were meant to fail. It has happened, and it is only foreseeable that it’ll happen again.  

But, this text was what brought me to start writing down my thoughts about books. I wanted to write a book review because I wanted to critique, praise, marvel, and gape at the work all at once in a way that was more than bits and strings in my head. I started drafting in February, and had only come to a place where I felt it was just barely coherent enough to read as a review in April. There was so much story inside, and there were so many things to talk about outside the story. And in that way, I am forever thankful to Marquez.